COMPONENTS
»

Rules
»»

Starting Player Token
»»
30 Mint Tokens
»»
33 Cards
»»
10 Location Cards
»»
21 Plan Cards
»»
2 AI Cards


OVERVIEW
Mint Works is a refreshingly light worker placement game for 1 to 4 players - easy to learn, with enough depth to keep you coming back.
Players take the role of neighborhood planners working to develop the finest neighborhood in the city of Mintopia.

When everything is set up, the play area should look something like the diagram above.


NOTE
The Mint Supply is not limited. If you run out of Mint Tokens, try taking a few from the Supplier without emptying any spaces.


KEYWORDS

Neighborhood
A player’s Neighborhood is the area in front of that player. All of the Mint Tokens, Plans and Buildings they own and have control over are considered to be in their Neighborhood.


Plan
Cards in the Plan Deck, Plan Supply and face down in players’ Neighborhoods. When a plan is built, it becomes a Builiding.


Building
Face up Plan cards in players’ Neighborhoods.


Gain
When a player gains something, they take it from the respective supply and place it into their Neighborhood.


Lose
When a Plan is lost, it is put face down at the bottom of the Plan Deck. Any lost are returned to the Mint Supply.


GAMEPLAY
Each round consists of the Development phase followed by the Upkeep phase.


DEVELOPMENT
The player currently holding the Starting Player Token takes the first turn.
A player has two options on their turn. They may choose either the Place or Pass action. After completing one of these actions, the turn is passed clockwise to the next player.
The Development phase repeats until all players consecutively pass, ending the phase. Then proceed to the Upkeep phase.


PLACE
The player chooses an unoccupied Mint Placement Space and places the required amount of on it, granting them the Location’s effect.


PASS
The player’s turn is over. On their next turn they will have the chance to choose Place or Pass again.


UPKEEP
»
If any player has seven or more provided by Buildings in their Neighborhood, the game ends and Scoring takes place.
»»
Refill the Plan Supply to three face up cards from the Plan Deck. If it is not possible to completely fill the Plan Supply, the game ends and Scoring takes place.
»»
Resolve all “Upkeep” effects on Buildings.
»»
If there are any on Deed Locations, the Owners of those Locations gain the indicated amount of from the Mint Supply.
»»
Return all on Locations to the Mint Supply.
»»
Each player gains .
»»
Proceed to the next Development phase.


SCORING
Count the total number of each player earns from Buildings in their Neighborhood.
The player with the most has the finest Neighborhood and wins!
If two or more players are tied for first place, the tied player with the smallest Neighborhood (i.e. fewest total Buildings and Plans) wins.
If there is still a tie, the tied player with the most wins.
Still tied? Then the tied player whose age is closest to 42 wins!


SOLITAIRE MODE
Mint Works can also be played solitaire. The game includes four different AI opponents to play against.
When everything is set up, the play area should look something like the diagram above.


SOLITAIRE SETUP
»
One (1) of the four (4) AIs is selected as your opponent.
»»
The four (4) Core Locations and two (2) Deed Locations are placed in a line on the table, ‘one player’ or ‘closed’ sides showing. Line them up in the following order: Producer, Wholesaler, Builder, Supplier, Leadership Council, Lotto.
»»
Optional: One (1) Advanced Location is selected at random and placed after the Lotto
»»
All Plans are shuffled and stacked face down near the Locations forming the Plan Deck.
»»
Two (2) Plans are drawn from and placed face up next to the Plan Deck forming the Plan Supply.
»»
The Mint Tokens are placed near the Plan Supply forming the Mint Supply.
»» are taken from the Mint Supply and added to your Neighborhood.
»» equal to your opponent’s Starting Mint Token Share are taken from the Mint Supply and placed into their Neighborhood.


AI CARD

SOLITARE-SPECIFIC RULES
The standard rules apply to the solitaire mode of Mint Works. There are, however, a few exceptions:
»»
When a Plan is taken from the Supplier and not replaced by another effect, immediately replace it with one (1) from the Plan Deck.

»
When the AI performs the Place action, it will always place in the first available Mint Placement Space in the Location line that it can use, starting with the Producer.
»»
If the AI is unable to use any Location, it chooses the Pass action.
»»
When performing the Place action for the AI, place the required amount of from the AI’s Mints on the corresponding Mint Placement Space.
»»
During the Upkeep phase, if there are no on the Supplier before returning all to the Mint Supply, put the two (2) Plans in the Plan Supply at the bottom of the Plan Deck, and replace them with two (2) new Plans from the Plan Deck.
»»
The AI will always build the oldest Plan in its Neighborhood first.
»»
The AI will buy Plans based on their Supplier Priority, checking first for the Cost of available Plans. If there is a tie for Cost, it then checks the Type of Plan.
If there is still a tie, it will buy the Plan closest to the Plan Deck. Only Plans the AI can currently afford are taken into consideration.


LOCATIONS IN DETAIL

BUILDER
The player builds one Plan in their Neighborhood.

CROWDFUNDER
The player gains from the Mint Supply, then each other player gains from the Mint Supply.


LEADERSHIP COUNCIL
The player gains the Starting Player Token from its current holder. They also gain from the Mint Supply.
Note: If a player already has the Starting Player Token, they may use Leadership Council to retain it.


LOTTO
The player gains the top card from the Plan Deck into their Neighborhood. They do not have to reveal this card until they decide to build it.
During the Upkeep phase, if there are any placed on this Location, the owner gains from the Mint Supply.


PRODUCER
The player gains from the Mint Supply.


RECYCLER
Placing here allows the player to take any one Building or Plan from their Neighborhood and place it at the bottom of the Plan Deck.
They gain from the Mint Supply equal to the sum of the Plan’s printed cost and value.


SUPPLIER
The player gains a Plan from the Plan Supply into their Neighborhood. The number of placed is determined by the desired Plan’s Cost.


LOCATIONS CONTINUED

SWAP MEET
Placing here allows the player to take any one Building or Plan from their Neighborhood and place it into the Plan Supply. Then they gain one Plan from the Supply and place it into their Neighborhood.


TEMP AGENCY
The player may utilize another Location’s ability as though they had placed on that Location.
The required number of to be placed is one (1) plus the desired Location’s cost.
A Location must have at least one occupied space in order to be targeted by the Temp Agency.


WHOLESALER
This Location functions identically to the Producer with the following exception:
During the Upkeep phase, if there are any placed on this Location, the owner gains from the Mint Supply.


PLANS/BUILDINGS IN DETAIL

ASSEMBLER
Plans bought from the Supplier are placed into this Neighborhood as Buildings.


BRIDGE
Counts as two (2) Buildings in all scenarios, including, but not limited to: Museum, Obelisk, Corporate HQ and Tiebreakers.


CO-OP
During the Upkeep phase, gain from the Mint Supply. Then choose another player to gain from the mint supply.


CORPORATE HQ
During the Upkeep phase, gain for each Building in the same Neighborhood.


CRANE
Pay one (1) fewer when building Plans at the Builder.


PLANS/BUILDINGS CONT.

DEEDS (WHOLESALER, LOTTO)
When a Deed type Plan is built, the corresponding Location becomes open (flip it over to its ‘open’ side), the player with this deed is considered the Owner of that Location.
The newly-available Location may now be used like any other Location.


GALLERY
During the Upkeep phase, take from the Mint Supply and place it on Gallery. Gallery has equal to the number of placed upon it.


LANDFILL
Reduce the number of provided by each Building in the same Neighborhood by one (1), to a minimum of zero (0).


MUSEUM
Provides for eachBuilding in the same Neighborhood.


OBELISK
Provides for each Building in the same Neighborhood.


TRUCK
Pay one (1) fewer when buying Plans at the Supplier, to a minimum of one (1) .


VAULT
Gain for each Plan (face down) in the same Neighborhood.


