ROOT
A Game of Woodland Might and Right
Game Design by Cole Wehrle
Art by Kyle Ferrin
Development by Patrick Leder
Print and Play Edition!

December 1st

Introduction
Root is a game of woodland might and right. Stalk the woods as the Vagabond, seize the initiative with the Eyrie birds of prey, rule over your subjects as the Marquise de Cat, or command the Woodland Alliance to create a new order. With creatures and cunning, you'll rule a fantastic forest kingdom in the ultimate asymmetric game of adventure and war.

Using This Book
Root contains two rulebooks, this rules reference and a learn-to-play guide. The rules reference is intended to be a concise, authoritative, and complete reference. While experienced gamers will be able to learn the game from the rules reference, those newer to the hobby should start with the learn-to-play guide. The learn-to-play guide is written in a more conversational tone and features many illustrated examples. It also contains setup instructions for the game’s many scenarios.

Note for Print-and-Players
This kit is intended for interested players eager to explore the world of Root. As we wanted to share it with you as soon as possible, certain features of the game have been trimmed. Some elements of the learn-to-play rulebook have been incorporated in this rulebook to make learning the game easier. We have also produced a teaching video that can now be found on our Kickstarter page.
We hope you enjoy this preview of Root as much as we’ve enjoyed making it!
We Don’t Need Playtesters/Editors
At the moment, Root is entering final development and balancing. We have a large pool of playtesters and will be relying on the work of professional editors to polish these rules after final adjustments to balance have been made. Though we appreciate your enthusiasm and comments, we are not soliciting public feedback on this version. This is our gift to you all for your wonderful support of the campaign so far.

Player Scaling
The following game is recommended for three to four players.
If playing with three, we recommend that you play without the Vagabond, though you may substitute the Vagabond for the Woodland Alliance.
If you wish to explore the two-player game, we advise that you play the Marquise against the Eyrie. Special two-player scenarios will be included in the final game, along with rules that allow for a huge range of player configurations.
What You Need to Play
This kit includes files for all of the paper components in the game. In addition players will need:
● 25 cubes in three different colors (for the Marquise, Woodland Alliance, and Eyrie)
● A Vagabond pawn and a single cube in a matching color for the Vagabond’s score cube
● 15 tokens to represent wood.
Setup
1. Assign​ ​Factions:​ ​Assign one faction to each player using any method.
2. Draw​ ​Starting​ ​Hands:​ ​Remove the four special victory condition cards from the deck of cards, and set them aside. Shuffle the deck. Each player draws 3 cards.
3. Prepare​ ​Deck:​ ​If playing with three or fewer players, return the Coalition Victory special victory card and the Chaos Victory special victory card to the box. Then, shuffle the special victory cards into the deck and place it near the map.
4. Place​ ​Ruins:​ In games with the Vagabond, shuffle the ruin tokens and place one, with the item side face down, on each red-bordered slot on the map. (The ruin tokens consist of the following items: <bag>, <boot>, <hammer>, and <sword>.)
5. Set​ ​Up​ ​Factions:​ The players set up their factions as described below in the following order: Marquise de Cat, Eyrie Dynasties, Forest Alliance, Vagabond.
Marquise de Cat Setup
1. Place a warrior in each clearing, including the Keep.
2. Place your Sawmills, Workshops, and Recruiters on the matching tracks of your faction board.
3. Place the wood tokens near your faction board.
4. Place a Sawmill on the Keep, place a Recruiter on any clearing adjacent to the Keep, and place a Workshop on any other clearing adjacent to the Keep.
5. Place your score marker on the “0” space of the score track.
Eyrie Dynasties Setup
1. Place your Roosts on the matching track of your faction board, matching Roosts with and without stars to the matching spaces.
2. Place a Roost and six warriors on the Eyrie Homeland (the red fox clearing in the bottom-right corner of the map).
3. Choose one of the four Eyrie leaders and place it on your faction board. This is your current​ ​leader​. Place the remaining leaders face up near your faction board.
4. Place your two Loyal Vizier cards on the matching Decree spaces of your faction board.
5. Place your score marker on the “0” space of the score track.
Woodland Alliance Setup
1. Place your Strongholds and Hideouts on the matching tracks on your faction board.
2. Place a Hideout and one warrior on any clearing with an empty slot. (Ensure that you place the Hideout matching the chosen clearing.)
3. Place a warrior on the leftmost space of the outrage track on your faction board. (This warrior is referred to as the outrage marker.)
4. Place a warrior in each forest nation box. (These warriors are referred to as supporters.)
5. Place your score marker on the “0” space of the score track.
Vagabond Setup
1. Pick a character card, then place the items listed on your character card in the Available pool shown by your faction board.
2. Place your character pawn on any forest.
3. Take a warrior from each player and place them on the Indifferent space of the alignment chart on your faction board. (These warriors are referred to as alignment markers)
4. Place your score marker on the “0” space of the score track.

Golden Rules

Rules Conflicts
If text on a card or faction board conflicts with text in this rules reference, the card or faction board takes precedence.
If text in the learn to play conflicts with text in this rules reference, this rules reference takes precedence.
Placing and Removing Pieces
If you are prompted to place a warrior, take it from your supply. If your warrior is removed, return it to your supply.
If you are prompted to place a building, take the leftmost building from its track on your faction board. If your building is removed, return it to the rightmost empty space.
If you are prompted to place wood, take it from the Marquise’s supply. If wood is removed, return it to the Marquise’s supply.
If you are prompted to place your pieces but you cannot place the total number prompted, you must place the maximum number possible. Example: if the Marquise recruits warriors, but does not have enough warriors in her supply to place a warrior at each recruiter, then she may place as many as able.
If you are prompted to remove your pieces but you cannot remove the total number prompted, you must remove the maximum number possible.
If you are prompted to place a piece at​ a building, place it in the clearing with that building.

Key Terms
Like other Leder Games, each faction in Root is played differently and has different goals.
However, all factions share certain terms which are described in this section.

Hits
Many effects in Root deal hits​.
Each time you take a hit, you must remove one of your warriors from the affected clearing. If you have no warriors, you must remove one of your other pieces of your choice from the affected clearing.
Most often, players deal hits in battle. In battle, the affected clearing is the clearing of battle.
Improvements and conspiracies can also deal hits; these effects specify the clearing from which pieces must be removed.
Whenever you deal a hit that removes a building, you score one victory point.
If you remove your last building from a clearing, you must also discard one improvement from your play area, if able.
Removing​ ​Hideouts.​ Whenever a Hideout is removed, the Alliance must remove any conspiracy and half (round up) of the supporters in the matching forest nation box. Then, the Alliance increases their Outrage by one.

Local
Some rules refer to a local​ player or piece.
A player is local if any of their pieces are located in any clearing with any of your pieces.
A piece is local if it is located in the same clearing as any of your pieces.

Piece
A piece​ of a faction is any component color-coded to it, so the Marquise’s pieces are all purple, the Alliance green, the Eyrie brown, and the Vagabond black or white.
Most factions have two types of pieces: warriors​ and buildings​. The Marquise also has wood​.
The Vagabond only has a pawn.​

Play Area
Some rules will prompt you to place a component in your play​ ​area​, which is the area above your faction board.

Ruler
The ruler of a clearing is the player with the most combined warriors and buildings in that clearing. If there is a tie between two players, no one is the ruler.
Lords​ ​of​ ​the​ ​Forest.​ The Eyrie is the ruler of a clearing when tied for most combined warriors and buildings there.
Lone​ ​Wanderer.​ ​The Vagabond pawn is not a warrior, so he cannot be the ruler of a clearing or cause another player to cease being ruler.

Key Concepts
Like in the previous section, all roles share certain concepts which are described in this section.
Clearings, Paths, and Forests
The map of the Woodland is composed of clearings​, which are connected by a network of paths​. A clearing is adjacent to all other clearings linked to it by a path.
Almost every clearing is aligned with one forest nation​: mouse, rabbit, or fox. The Keep of Marquise de Cat is a clearing aligned with all nations.
Areas on the map enclosed by paths and clearings are called forests​. A forest is adjacent to all clearings that touch it without crossing a path, and it is adjacent to all forests that are separated by only one path. The forest surrounding the map is out of play, not part of the map.
Each clearing has a number of slots​, shown as white and red boxes. Whenever you build​ a building in any way, the clearing where you build it must have an open slot. You cannot build in a clearing with no open slots.
In games with the Vagabond, each red-bordered slot begins covered with a ruin​ token. Once the Vagabond explores a ruin and takes its token, the open slot can hold a building, as normal.
In games without the Vagabond, the red-bordered slots begin open.

Multi-use Cards
Root uses a single deck of multi-use cards. Each card has three uses:
1. A​ ​suit​ matching one of the four forest nations: bird, fox, rabbit, and mouse. Each faction can spend cards of particular suits for different effects.
2. A​ ​conspiracy,​ ​which the Alliance can complete by spending supporters to earn victory points, resources, and infrastructure improvements.
3. An​ ​improvement,​ which can be crafted. Once crafted, improvements confer various bonuses and may put items​ into play for the Vagabond to take.
Special​ ​Victory​ ​Cards.​ ​Four cards in the deck are special​ ​victory​ ​cards​. Like with the other cards, you can spend a special victory card from your hand for its suit. For details on playing these cards, see Goals​ ​and​ ​Play​ ​(page XX).
Birds​ ​Are​ ​Wild.​ ​The bird suit is wild—you can spend a bird card as any other suit, including if you must spend multiple cards of matching nation. This rule does not work in reverse: if you are prompted to spend a bird card, you cannot instead spend a card of another suit.
Cards​ ​Are​ ​Secret.​ ​You cannot reveal any cards in your hand to other players.

Crafting
Each faction can craft cards in their hand into improvements​. Improvements can score you victory points, provide a persistent benefit, or give you a one-time ability that you can activate by discarding the improvement.
During Daylight, you can craft any number of cards from your hand into improvements.
To​ ​craft​ ​an​ ​improvement,​ ​you must exhaust crafting buildings of the nations shown on the improvement. The nation of a crafting building matches the nation of its clearing.
Each crafting building can be exhausted only once per turn. When you exhaust a crafting building, you can flip it, and then flip it back over at the end of your Evening. (If you have two crafting buildings in a fox clearing, you may not craft two cards which require two foxes each.)
Each faction exhausts a different crafting building:
● The Marquise exhausts Workshops.
● The Eyrie exhausts starred Roosts.
● The Alliance exhausts Strongholds.
● The Vagabond exhausts <hammer>, not buildings. All of the Vagabond’s <hammer> match the nation of his current clearing.
When​ ​you​ ​craft​ ​an​ ​improvement,​ resolve its text, and then do the following:
● If you crafted an improvement with a persistent or activated​ ​effect​, turn it sideways and put it into your play area above your faction board.
● If you crafted an improvement with an item,​ take the matching item token from the supply and put it into your play area. If the Vagabond is not playing, or if no matching item token remains, do not put the item token into your play area. If the Vagabond crafts an improvement with an item, he may immediately put the crafted item into his exhausted items pool.
Cottage​ ​Industry.​ ​The Alliance score twice the victory points listed on improvements they craft.

Movement
When you take a move​, you may take any number of your warriors (or your Vagabond pawn) from one clearing and move them to one adjacent clearing.
If you rule the origin clearing, you may move your warriors to any​ adjacent clearing.
If you do​ ​not​ rule the origin clearing, you may move your warriors only to an adjacent clearing that you rule, that no one rules, or whose ruler gives you permission to enter.
A given piece is not limited in the number of times it can move during the same turn. If an effect allows you to take multiple moves, you may move the same or separate groups of warriors.
Nimble.​ The Vagabond can move into a clearing without permission, and can move into forests with Slip or when retreating from battle.
Alliance​ ​Movement.​ ​The Alliance is uniquely restricted in its ability to move. The Alliance can only move by executing appropriate conspiracies.

Battle
When you initiate a battle, choose a clearing where you have warriors. You are the attacker​.
Choose one player in the clearing of battle to be the defender​.
If the defender has no warriors in the clearing of battle, remove all of the defender’s pieces there. The attacker scores one victory point per building removed. The battle then ends. (If the Vagabond is the defender and has no available <sword>, he must retreat in step 1.)
A battle has four steps:
1. Defender​ ​may​ ​declare​ ​retreat.​ If defender does retreat, the defender takes hits based on the number of retreating warriors, the attacker may play one ambush card to deal a hit, and then the battle ends.
2. Defender​ ​may​ ​play​ ​ambush​ ​cards​ to deal hits to the attacker.
3. Roll​ ​dice​ ​and​ ​count​ ​hits​ to both attacker and defender, who can modify hits with other effects.
4. Deal​ ​hits​ simultaneously.​ Then the battle ends.
1. Defender Declares Retreat
The defender may retreat if he rules an adjacent clearing. If the defender does not retreat, continue to step 2.
If the defender chooses to retreat, he immediately takes the hits listed on the following table.
Retreating Warriors 1–2 3–4 5–6 7+
Hits 0 1 2 3
After the defender takes hits, the attacker may play one ambush card matching the clearing of battle to immediately deal one unpreventable hit.
Finally, the defender must move all remaining warriors to one adjacent clearing he rules. End the battle immediately.
Vagabond​ ​Retreat.​ ​The Vagabond takes hits when retreating based on his total number of available and exhausted items, rather than number of retreating warriors. The Vagabond may retreat into any adjacent clearing or forest.
2. Defender Declares Ambush
The defender may play ambush cards matching the clearing of battle. Each played ambush card immediately deals two unpreventable hits.
If any attacking warriors remain after taking hits, continue to step 3. Otherwise, end the battle immediately.
3. Roll Dice and Count Hits
Roll both dice. The attacker will deal hits equal to the higher roll, and the defender will deal hits equal to the lower roll. If the rolls are equal, attacker and defender will deal the same number of hits.
<Print-and-Play Note: A roll of “4” is considered a “0” so the four-sided dice only produces numbers 0-3. The game will have custom d12s included with an equivalent distribution.>
The maximum number of hits you can deal from rolling equals the number of your warriors in the clearing of battle, whether you are the attacker or defender.
After counting these hits, the attacker and defender can add hits by using special abilities or other effects in their areas of play. Added hits are not​ limited by the number of warriors in the clearing of battle. (For example, if you have 3 warriors and roll 3 hits, then add 1 hit because of a special ability, you deal 4 hits.)
Continue to step 4.
4. Deal Hits
Attacker and defender deal hits simultaneously. The attacker and defender can ignore hits taken by using special abilities and other effects in their areas of play.
If you remove your last building from a clearing, you must also discard one improvement from your play area, if able.
Whenever you deal a hit that removes a building, you score one victory point.
Hits as the Marquise
Field​ ​Hospitals.​ Whenever a Marquise warrior takes a hit, the Marquise may spend any card to move the warrior to the Keep, instead of removing it. She cannot use Field Hospitals if she does not rule the Keep.
The​ ​Keep​ ​of​ ​Marquise​ ​de​ ​Cat.​ During any battle in the Keep, the Marquise can ignore one hit taken, even if retreating.
Hits as the Alliance
Hideout​ ​Loss.​ Whenever a Hideout is removed, the Alliance must remove any conspiracy and half (round up) of the supporters in the matching forest nation box. Then, the Alliance increases their Outrage by one.
Hidden.​ If defending with a single warrior, the Alliance can ignore one hit taken.
Hits as the Vagabond
For each hit the Vagabond wishes to deal, he must exhaust a <sword>. If he has no available
<sword> to exhaust, or if he chooses not to exhaust more <sword>, he cannot deal further hits.
Each time the Vagabond takes a hit, he must damage one available item. Because the attacker and defender take hits simultaneously, the Vagabond can exhaust and then damage the same
<sword>. If no available items remain to damage, the Vagabond may damage an exhausted item. If no undamaged items remain to damage, the Vagabond ignores any remaining hits.

Goal and Play

Victory
The first player to reach 40 victory points immediately wins the game.

Special Victory Conditions
During play, you may draw special victory cards.
During your Daylight, you may play a special victory card into your play area to activate it.
Remove your score marker from the score track. For the rest of the game, you can only win by meeting the victory condition listed on your activated special victory card.
Alternatively, you may play a special victory card for its suit. If you do, do not discard the card; instead, place the card face up near the map to show that it is available​ ​to take.
During Daylight, the acting player can take an available special victory card into their hand by spending a card of matching suit.
An activated special victory card does not count against your hand size, and it cannot be removed from play. Once you have activated a special victory card, you cannot replace it by activating a different special victory card.
● Chaos​ ​Victory:​ ​During your Birdsong, you win the game immediately if every other player has 33 to 39 victory points or has activated a special victory card.
● Coalition​ ​Victory:​ ​When you play this special victory card to change your victory condition, place your score marker on the faction board of the player with the fewest victory points. If that player wins the game, you also win.
● Economic​ ​Victory:​ ​During your Birdsong, you win the game immediately if you have five crafted improvements in your play area.
● Military​ ​Victory:​ ​During your Birdsong, you win the game immediately if you rule the Keep of the Marquise de Cat. (Not playable by the Vagabond or Marquise.)

Order of Play
Play begins with the Marquise and then continues to the Eyrie, the Alliance, and the Vagabond.

Turn Structure
Each player’s turn consists of three phases: Birdsong, Daylight, and Evening.

Marquise de Cat

Victory Points
The Marquise scores victory points each time she builds a building. She also scores victory points by crafting some improvements, and by removing buildings owned by the other players.

Birdsong
Place one wood at each Sawmill.

Daylight
You may take up to three actions, plus another action for each bird card you spend. You can take actions in any order. Your possible actions are listed below:

March

Take two moves.

Battle

Initiate a battle.

Build
Choose whether you want to build a Sawmill, Workshop, or Recruiter. Find the leftmost building of that type remaining on your faction board. Note that building’s cost, listed at the top of its column.
Then, choose any clearing you rule with an empty slot. Remove wood equal to the building’s cost from any clearings you rule that are adjacent to the chosen clearing or connected to the chosen clearing by any number of other clearings you rule.
Finally, place the chosen building on the chosen clearing, and score the victory points listed on the space under the building removed from your faction board.
You do not lose victory points for returning a building to your faction board, and you still score victory points when you build a building that was previously returned to your faction board.

Recruit
Place one warrior at each Recruiter. Then, the Alliance increases its Outrage by one.

Incite Mob
Spend three cards of matching nation. In each clearing of matching nation that you rule, remove all buildings of other players, and score 2 victory points per building removed (instead of 1 victory point, as normal). Each player who removed any buildings draws cards equal to the number of their own buildings removed.
You may Craft without spending an action.

Craft
Craft an improvement from your hand, using Workshops.

Evening
Each player draws cards equal to their own <coin>.
Then, you discard down to your hand limit of five cards.

The Eyrie Dynasties

Victory Points
The Eyrie scores victory points during its Evening based on the number of Roosts on the map, by crafting some improvements, and by removing buildings owned by the other players.

The Decree
On your turn, you will take actions using a growing set of instructions called the Decree​. The Decree has four columns, each matching one of four actions. Over time, you will add cards to your Decree. Add new cards on top of cards already in a column. Fan the cards in a column down, so all of the card suits are visible.
You will end Daylight by running the Decree, performing the actions shown by its four columns.
In each column, you take one action per card in the column, and you must take that action in the clearing nation matching the card suit. If you cannot take an action, you immediately fall into Turmoil.

Birdsong
You must play one bird card or one or two non-bird cards to the Decree. You may play each card to the end of any of the four columns.

Daylight
First, you may Reform and Craft any number of times.

Reform
Spend any card in order to move a card of matching suit from one column of the Decree to the end of another column.

Craft
Craft an improvement from your hand, using Roost with stars.
Then, resolve the Decree. Start with the leftmost column and move right. In each column, start with the top card and move down.

Recruit
Place a warrior in any clearing with a Roost whose nation matches the card suit. If you cannot place a warrior, you fall into turmoil.

Move
Move from any clearing whose nation matches the card suit. If you cannot move at least one warrior, you fall into turmoil.

Battle
Initiate a battle in any clearing whose nation matches the card suit. If you cannot initiate a battle, you fall into turmoil.

Build
Build a Roost in any clearing you rule whose nation matches the card suit. If you cannot build a Roost, you fall into turmoil.
Jealous​ ​Fiefs.​ You can only have one Roost per clearing.

Evening
Score the victory points shown below the rightmost empty space on your roost track.
Discard down to your hand limit of four cards.

Turmoil
If you fall into turmoil, discard all of the cards in the Decree except any Loyal Viziers.
Then, flip your current leader face down and set it aside, choose a new leader from those that remain face up and place it near your faction board. Place your Loyal Viziers on the Decree spaces shown on your new leader.
If you ever have no face-up leaders remaining, turn all of your facedown leaders face up.
If you have no Roosts on the map, build one in any clearing.
Finally, end your turn. Do not perform any more Decree actions, and skip Evening.

Leaders
The Eyrie has four leader cards, which are described below.

Builder
Your Loyal Viziers begin on Recruit and Build.
Whenever an improvement scores you victory points, you score double the victory points.

Charismatic
Your Loyal Viziers begin on Recruit and Move.
For each Recruit action on the Decree, you must place two warriors instead of one.

Commander
Your Loyal Viziers begin on Move and Battle.
During any battle as the attacker, you inflicts an extra hit.

Despot
Your Loyal Viziers begin on Move and Build.
Whenever you remove an opponent’s building, you score another victory point.

Woodland Alliance

Victory Points
The Woodland Alliance scores victory points by revealing some conspiracies, by crafting some improvements, and by removing buildings owned by the other players.

Hideout Card Slots
Each built Hideout provides one card slot, which you can use with the Keep Secrets and Conspire actions.
To place a card in a Hideout card slot, its matching Hideout must be on the map, and the slot must not have a card in it.
If a Hideout is removed, discard any card in the matching Hideout card slot.

Supporters
Your faction board has three forest nation boxes: rabbit, fox, and mouse. Any warriors in your forest nation boxes are called supporters​.
If a Hideout is removed, also remove half (rounded up) of the supporters in the matching forest nation box.

Birdsong
Return all conspiracies on Hideout card slots to your hand (both face-up and facedown cards). Then, draw cards as indicated by your Outrage. (Draw these cards in addition to your draw on the Marquise’s turn.)

Daylight
You can take actions by spending supporters from a forest nation box, returning spent supporters to your supply. Each action lists its cost in supporters, which must come from the same forest nation box. Any supporters left in forest nation boxes at the end of Daylight remain for future turns.

Spy
Spend one supporter and one card to draw one card.

Battle
Spend one supporter to initiate a battle in a clearing of matching nation.

Craft
Craft an improvement from your hand, using Strongholds. This action does not cost supporters.

Educate
Spend a fox, rabbit, or mouse card to place a supporter in the matching forest nation box. (Bird cards are wild, so you can spend one to place a supporter in any forest nation box.)

Train
Spend a bird card and one supporter to place a warrior in any clearing whose nation matches the spent supporter.

Keep Secrets
Play a card face down to an empty Hideout card slot. This action does not cost supporters.

Conspire
Spend supporters equal to the cost of the conspiracy to play the card face up in the empty Hideout card slot matching the nation of the spent supporters. Resolve the conspiracy.
Effect​ ​resolution.​ ​You can resolve the effects of the conspiracy in any order, unless otherwise noted, and you can choose which effects to resolve.
Effect​ ​location.​ ​In general, the Hideout slot of your conspiracy does not limit where you can resolve an effect.​ ​The conspiracy will state whether you must resolve its effect at the matching Hideout or not.
Supporter​ ​nation.​ ​The supporters you spend do not need to match the card suit of the conspiracy played.

Build Hideout
Spend two supporters to build a Hideout and place a warrior in a clearing of matching nation.

Build Stronghold
Spend three supporters to build a Stronghold in a clearing you rule of matching nation.

Evening
Place one supporter in each forest nation box.
Then, discard down to your hand limit of two cards.

The Outrage Track
The Alliance gains bonus card draws during Birdsong according to their current Outrage.
Outrage increases whenever the Marquise takes the Recruit action or whenever a Hideout is removed.

Vagabond

Victory Points
The Vagabond scores victory points by completing tasks that affect the other players, by crafting some improvements, and by removing buildings owned by the other players.

Vagabond Card
Roger​ ​the​ ​Raccoon:​ ​When you use the Steal action, you are considered to have one more available <sword>.
The​ ​Crafting​ ​Beaver:​ ​You can spend a <torch> to build a building of your current clearing’s ruler. You must follow that faction’s rules for building a building, but you do not have to spend wood to build a Marquise building. That building’s owner cannot stop you from building.

Item Tokens
<Torch>: Can exhaust to Battle, Repair, Steal, Aid, or Explore.
<Boot>: Can exhaust to Move.
<Hammer>: Can exhaust as part of Craft.
<Crossbow>: Can exhaust to inflict a hit when you or your enemy retreats.
<Bag>: If available during your Evening, your hand size is two cards higher.
<Coin>: If available during the Marquise’s Birdsong, you draw another card.

Alignment
Your faction board shows an alignment chart composed of many alignment boxes connected by black arrows. At any given time, this chart will hold an alignment marker from each faction in play.
<Print-and-Play Note: Use a warrior cube from each other player as an alignment marker>

Adjusting Alignment
Whenever you fulfill the task listed on a black arrow connecting your current alignment space to another alignment space, you score the listed victory points and move your alignment marker to the connected space.
Your alignment shifts for removing warriors in battle regardless of whether you are the attacker or defender.
Positive Tasks (right side)
● Gift​ ​one​ ​card​ ​to​ ​a​ ​player​ ​in​ ​one​ ​turn:​ ​Score 1 victory point.
● Gift​ ​two​ ​cards​ ​to​ ​a​ ​player​ ​in​ ​one​ ​turn:​ ​Score 2 victory points.
● Gift​ ​two​ ​cards​ ​to​ ​a​ ​player​ ​in​ ​one​ ​turn:​ Score 3 victory points. You are now an Ally.
Negative Tasks (left side)
● Steal​ ​one​ ​card:​ ​Score 1 victory point.
● Remove​ ​one​ ​warrior​ ​in​ ​one​ ​battle:​ ​Score 2 victory points. You are now a Nemesis.
● Remove​ ​two​ ​warriors​ ​in​ ​one​ ​battle:​ Score 3 victory points. You remain a Nemesis.

Cross-chart Shifts
● Remove​ ​1​ ​warrior​ ​in​ ​one​ ​battle:​ ​Score 2 victory points. You are now a Nemesis. (From any non-negative alignment.)
● Gift​ ​two​ ​cards​ ​to​ ​a​ ​player:​ ​Score 2 victory points, and move to second positive alignment. (From the first negative alignment.)

End-of-Side Tasks
● Gift​ ​one​ ​card:​ ​Score 2 victory points. (From end of positive side.) ● Remove​ ​one​ ​warrior​ ​in​ ​one​ ​battle:​ ​Score 2 victory points. (From end of negative side.)
Ally Benefits and Penalties
While a faction’s alignment marker is on the final friendly space of the alignment chart, that faction is an Ally​.
When moving from one clearing to another by exhausting <boot>, you may move any number of Ally warriors along with you, even warriors from multiple Ally factions. If you move any Ally warriors with you, you do not gain the benefit of your Nimble special ability.
In any battle against a non-Ally defender, you may treat Ally warriors in the clearing of battle as your own, even warriors from multiple Ally factions. The maximum hits you can deal by rolling equals the number of Ally warriors there, but you can increase your maximum hits by exhausting <sword>.
When you take hits, you must first remove Ally warriors in the clearing of battle. If no Ally warriors remain, you take further hits.
You cannot use Steal on an Ally!

Nemesis Penalties
While a faction’s alignment marker is on the final two negative spaces of the alignment chart, that faction is a Nemesis​. <PNP Note: This still might be named “Hostile” on the faction board.>
You must spend another <boot> to move into a clearing with any pieces owned by a Nemesis faction. These penalties stack, so moving into a clearing with two Nemesis factions will cost a total of three <boot>.

Birdsong
Move all of your exhausted items to your available items.
Then, take one move without exhausting <boot>, even if you move into a space with Nemesis players. For this move only, you may move into a forest.

Daylight
You can take actions in any order, as described below.

Craft
Craft an improvement from your hand, by exhausting <hammer>. The nation of all
<hammer> matches your current clearing.

Move
You can exhaust a <boot> to move to an adjacent clearing. For every Nemesis faction in the destination clearing, you must exhaust another <boot> in order to move.
Gift Give any number of cards matching your current clearing to a local player. (Bird cards are wild, so you can always gift bird cards.) Then, for each card you give, you may take one item from above their faction board.
You can exhaust a <torch> to take an action from those listed below.

Battle
Initiate a local battle.

Repair
Move one damaged item to your exhausted items pool.

Steal
Target a local player. If you have more available <sword> than that player’s local warriors, take a random card from that player. Then, that player scores 1 victory point.

Aid
The Alliance places one supporter in the forest nation box matching your current clearing. Then, you score 1 victory point.
You can only use this action while you are in a clearing with a Hideout.

Explore
Take one local ruin token, reveal it, and place it in your exhausted items pool. Then, you score 1 victory point.

Evening
Discard down to your hand limit, equal to your <bag>.
If you are in a forest, move all of your damaged items to your exhausted items pool.

Improvement Clarifications
Cobbler:​ ​For the Vagabond, this improvement gives a free <boot> whenever he exhausts a <boot>.

