Game Set-up
Unfold the World Map and Performance Track and
place them on the table as shown below. Separate the 90
coffee beans by color and place them in piles as noted
on the bottom of the World Map, arranged by Color
Rank. These beans represent The Fields. Shuffle the
Blend Slates and place them near the Western side of
the World Map.
Put Score Tokens
in a Roaster. Pull
them out one at a
time and stack on
the Performance
Track according to
number of
players.
Shuffle Blend Slates,
draw 3 and fill the
spaces above
the World
Map.

THE BREWMASTER
Players should designate one player as the
“Brewmaster,” who will control the assignment of
Turn Order Tokens, movement of the Scoring Tokens
on the Performance Track, and make sure each round
is running cmoothly. Typically, this should be either
the owner of the game, or the person who has played
the most.

Each Starter Slate
has a column of 5
beans of specific
colors. Take beans
of the appropriate
color from The
Fields and add
them to the
Slates.
Place Beans
from The
Fields onto
the Country
Crop spaces
connected to the
Countries below
them, based
on the color
represented in
the circles on the
Blend Slates.

Shuffle the
9 Country Tokens
with special actions
and randomly place
them on the World
Map in the round
Country spaces.

Give each player a set of pieces in
the player’s color, a Roaster bag,
and a Research Lab. Research
Markers should be placed at
the start of each Research Track.
Players take 2 white beans
and 1 yellow bean from The
Fields and place them into their
Roasters.

ADDITIONS FOR GAMES WITH 3-6 PLAYERS
VivaJava scales easily for 3 to 6 players with only a few modifications to set-up and game play. In set-up and during
the game when Blend Slates are placed above the regions on the World Map, a special symbol on each Blend Slate
indicates an action that must be performed for a specific Country in that region.

Bean is not placed
and Country Token
is turned over.
Bean is not placed
and Country Token
is turned over.
Bean is not placed
and Country Token
is turned over.

This symbol shows that the
players should not place a bean
in the Country Crop space,
and the Country Token in that
location should be flipped to
the ● side.

ADDITIONS FOR GAMES WITH 3-5 PLAYERS

When fewer Field Researchers scour The Fields for valuable beans, the VivaJava CoffeeCo. will often release a
generic Blend into the market to maintain a healthy - if not terribly flavorful - bottom line. In games with 3 to
5 players, the Stale portion of the Best-Seller List is dominated by the Coffee* Blend. This Blend is immune to
degrading and remains in the Stale position for the entire game.

During set-up in a game
with 3 to 5 players, place the
Coffee* Slate in the Stale
position on the Best-Seller List.

This Blend Slate
cannot be moved
nor removed by
any means during
the game.

Sequence of Play

VivaJava: The Coffee Game is played over several rounds with each round broken down into three distinct phases:

1. IN THE FIELD
In Turn Order, players place their
Field Researcher pawns on the
World Map and collect beans.

2. BLEND/RESEARCH
Players break into teams and either
Blend (combine beans to score) or
Research (gain abilities).

3. POPULAR OPINION
Players add new Blends to the
Best-Seller List and calculate scores.
Blends then “degrade” and weaken.

The following details how to play VivaJava with 5-8 players. For additions to game play for 3-4 players,
please see page 13.

1. IN THE FIELD

The World Map is split into three coffee-rich regions
(Americas, Africa, and Asia) each with its own
Country Crop space and action that players will
explore by placing their Field Researcher pawns.
VivaJava is, at it’s heart, a social game. Players may and are encouraged to tell (or not tell) their intentions and
strategize before placing a Field Researcher. This is key, because players will split into teams each round based on the
region in which they place their Field Researcher. Players may make promises, but nothing may be exchanged, no
deals are binding, and a player can never show the contents of their Roaster unless a card, action or rule requires it.

Determine Turn Order
The player with the lowest score on the Performance
Track will go first. If there is tie, as shown in the
example to the right, the player on the top of the
stack is first in turn order. The Brewmaster gathers
all players’ Turn Order Tokens and places them on
the Turn Order Track in proper order for the Round.

Place Field Researchers
Each player, in turn order, places their Field Researchers onto a
Country on the World Map. When a player chooses a Country, they
must immediately resolve the action represented on the Country
Token and then take the bean from the corresponding Country Crop
space below (if available) and place it into their Roaster. Each symbol
listed on the Tokens represents a positive action (marked in dark brown)
or a negative action (marked in red). Positive actions are optional, whereas negative actions must be performed.
Players continue placing Field Researchers in turn order until all players have chosen. Once a country is chosen
no other player can choose that same Country. In games of 3 to 6 players, countries that are flipped to the ● side
cannot be chosen, unless a special action would allow it. For more information about specific Country Token abilities
and effects, see Appendix A on page 16.
On the first round of the game, players ignore penalties if they place their Field Researcher on a country that
contains a red negative action. In all subsequent turns, red negative actions must be taken.

2. BLEND/RESEARCH

Players split into three teams (Americas, Africa, or Asia region) and
decide together whether they will Blend or Research.
A team’s action is determined by a majority vote. To vote, each player
takes the Blend/Research Token in their hand and secretly chooses a
side to place face-up on the table. Loud debating, advertising, and negotiation are encouraged.
When everyone is ready, The Brewmaster will signal all players to reveal their Tokens
simultaneously; Any Token that is revealed with Blend face-up is a vote for the team to
Blend, and any Token with Research is a vote for the team to Research.
Count the votes on each team, and determine which action each team has collectively
chosen through majority vote. All ties result in a Research action.

THE VOTE
The Brewmaster should make sure that no team proceeds with Blend or Research actions until the vote is complete. This
is important to keep the simultaneous actions from becoming chaotic.
INVESTMENT TOKENS
If any player(s) has an Investment Token, the Brewmaster should stop play immediately after the Vote is complete and
offer a brief opportunity to place an Investment Token onto a Blend at this time. (see pg. 18 Invest)

2a. BLEND
It’s time for the team to work together to create a Blend to top the Best-Seller List. Created Blends are ranked by
a simple poker scale and placed onto the Best-Seller List to score points, hopefully over the course of several rounds.

Make a Blend
Each team takes the Blend Slate above their region on the World
Map. There are five spaces for beans on each Blend Slate and these
will be filled by randomly pulling beans from each player’s Roaster.
The team unanimously decides in which order players will pull beans
from Roasters. One player starts by shaking his roaster, randomly
pulling a bean and placing it on the Blend Slate in one of the five
bean spaces. Then, the team decides which player pulls the next bean
until all five spaces have been filled or the team unanimously decides
to stop. The only restriction is that all players must contribute at
least one bean. They are not required to contribute more. The Blend
Slate does not need to be filled.
If there is ever no unanimous decision, players on a team must pull
one single bean at a time
in turn order. After all
players have contributed
one bean, they may pull
a bean or pass until all
players have passed or the
Blend Slate is full.

COFFEE PROTOCOL
A player cannot show what’s in a
Roaster unless a card, action or rule
requires it. Talk about it, lie about it,
be detailed in your descriptions, but
do not show what’s in it.

Free Bean Space
Some Blend Slates have one bean space filled
in with a specific color. When the other 4 bean
spaces on the Blend are filled by a team (and
all players have contributed at least one bean
to the Blend), a bean of the specified color may
be added to the Blend Slate from the Fields.
If there are no beans of that type in the Fields,
players cannot use this ability.

2a. Blend (continued)

The Blend Rank scale lists the possible ranking of a five-bean Blend.
Blends are ranked and placed onto the Best-Seller List based first on
the ranking of the combination, then on the color of the blend. For
example, a Bold Blend of black beans would be ranked higher than a
Bold Blend of white beans. Also, a Bold Blend of white beans would
be higher-ranked than a Regular Blend of black beans.
Any extra “kicker” beans are used to break ties. A Bold Blend Blend Rank Scale
with a Black Bean kicker would be higher ranked than a Red
Bean Kicker. However, if two or more exact Blends are created
simultaneously, the Blend with the team member who has
the highest turn order is placed higher on the List.

Place on the Best-Seller List
Once the Blend is complete, each player places a Blend Marker
of his color onto the Slate. Once all Blending teams are done,
all new Blends are simultaneously placed into position on
the Best-Seller List according to the Roast Ranking that is
shown on the board.
All inferior Blends are moved to the left on the List and the
new Blend is inserted to the right of any Blend it outranks.
If for any reason, a new or existing Blend does not rank high
enough to place onto the list, it is removed from play. All
beans on the Slate are returned to The Fields, and all markers
are returned to players. Investment Tokens on the Slate are
returned to the general supply (see page 18).
After Blending, each player receives 1 RP to distribute on
their own Research Lab Ability Tracks!
Each player has 3 Blend Markers. If a player needs to place
a fourth Marker, that player removes a Marker from another
blend or doesn’t add a Marker to a Blend created this round.
A player may never have more than one Marker on a single
Blend. If a new Blend is exactly the same as a Blend already
on the List, the old Blend is considered inferior.

Example of Blending

Chris, Cherilyn and T.C. are all in the same region
and have decided to Blend. Chris says he has the
best chance to give the team three-of-a-kind in
yellow beans. Trusting him, Cherilyn and T.C. let
Chris Blend first.

Chris reaches into his Roaster and pulls out a
yellow bean, placing it onto the Blend Slate.
So far, so good.

The team lets Chris to pull again
- another yellow bean!

Chris pulls one more a time - it’s
a white bean. Drat!
Since every team member must
contribute at least one bean,
Chris can no longer Blend.
Cherilyn goes next and pulls a
white bean - things are suddenly
looking better!
Cherilyn has more white beans, but T.C. must
contribute. He closes his eyes, reaches into his
Roaster... and pulls out a white bean! The team
now has an Americano Blend. Not bad.

The Best-
Seller List

Cherilyn, Chris and T.C. now have a new Blend and
are ready to place it on the market. The current Top Cup!
Blend is a red/yellow Half-Caf Blend and the Swell
Blend is a black/white Decaf Blend. As the team’s new
Americano Blend is stronger, the Half-Caf and Decaf
Blends are moved down on the Best-Seller List and the
Americano Blend takes the Top Cup! spot, which will net
the team 3 Performance Points during Popular Opinion.

2a. Blend (continued)

Rainbow Blends
A Rainbow Blend is a special type of Blend that teams may also
create that requires five different colored beans. A Rainbow
is ranked higher than a Regular Blend and does not degrade
during Popular Opinion.
There can be only one Rainbow on the Best-Seller List at a
time. When a Rainbow is created, any Rainbow Blend on the
Best-Seller List is removed from the game and replaced by
the new Rainbow Blend. If more than one Rainbow is created
simultaneously, the Blend from the team with the member
who holds highest turn order is placed on the Best-Seller List
and the other is removed.

Simultaneous Actions
The world of Big Coffee is constantly on the move. All Blending and Researching teams should complete their
actions simultaneously. Blending teams should not sit and wait for Researching teams to finish or vice versa.

BEAN MANAGEMENT
VivaJava is a bean management game, not a bean
collection game. The most common mistake made by
a new player is taking as many beans as possible.
Players should skillfully select which beans they
place in their Roasters with a particular goal in mind,
whether that is to create a Blend with one particular
color or to create a unique Rainbow Blend.

2b. RESEARCH
Sometimes a little training is required in order for Field Researchers
to stay at the top of their game. During the Research Phase, a team
will split up and return to their own respective Research Labs to brew
up some special abilities so they can create even more robust blends.

Spending Research Points
Each player on a team that chooses Research receives 3 Research
Points (RPs) to distribute amongst his Ability Tracks. Players make
this choice alone and can distribute them in any way they choose by
moving their Research Markers from left to right and covering up
a new spot on the track. Each spot represents 1 point used and the
columns represent when a player has reached a new Research level.
The first spot in a column is marked ● to indicate that a player has
reached a new level. When players have used enough Research Points
to move a marker to this position, they have “leveled up” that ability
and can take advantage of the special action indicated for that part
of the track in the next round of play (with the exception of Flavor
Cards, see page 17). Once a player has crossed this level line, no actions
or abilities can cause them to move backwards beyond this point.
Also, at Game End, players will receive Performance Points (PP) for
each level they have achieved on each Research Track. Scoring is
cumulative; for example, achieving the second level of Grow would
net a player a total of 2 PP at Game End.
Once an Ability Track has been completed, a player may now use an
End-track Ability. Specific abilities for each track are detailed on each
Research Lab, and enhance a player’s ability to acquire Performance
Points. Research attributes are explained in detail on page 18.

Research Lab

Research Markers are moved from left to
right on the Ability Tracks. In the example
below, Shawn has used his 3 RPs to move up
2 spots in GROW, and 1 spot in SELECT.
He will now be able to use the GROW
special ability during the next round, and
will receive 1 PP at Game End.

2b. Research (continued)

SPEND PERFORMANCE POINTS FOR RP
Once all teams have completed Blending and Researching, the Brewmaster should pause to allow any Researching
players to trade PP for RP in turn order. When all eligible players have chosen, continue to Popular Opinion.

Using Performance Points for Research Points
One of the most important benefits of Researching is that players may
also trade Performance Points for Research Points.
After all teams have finished Researching and Blending, any players
who Researched (not players who Blended) during the Round choose,
in turn order, how many Performance Points they would like to
trade for Research Points. The player’s Scoring Token is then moved
backwards on the Performance Track to indicate this. For each one
PP spent, the player receives one (1) RP to use immediately to move
his Research Markers along the Ability Tracks, or to use for certain
End-track Abilities (such as for the Flavor Track - see Appendix C on
page 18 for more details).
It is very advantageous to use this extra capital as early investments in
abilities can make a large difference in the quality of a player’s Blends
on the Best-Seller List. Note that players may not move their Scoring
Token to the -3 Performance Points mark on the Performance Track,
but never below at any time.

Shawn gained the GROW Ability through
the allocation of his initial 3 RPs. However,
he now has his sights set on gaining
SELECT. He indicates that he would like
to trade 2PP for 2 RP. His Score Token is
moved backwards two spaces and he adjusts
his Research Marker on the Track, reaching
the first level of SELECT.

3. POPULAR OPINION

Field Researchers must be given credit for their work. The final phase of each round of play is entirely based around
dishing out Performance Points and preparing for the next round of play - or the end of the game!

Scoring
After all players have finished Blending and Researching, Performance Points are awarded to players (in turn
order) for any Blend with their Blend Marker on the Best-Seller List. There are five possible positions on the List,
with payout amounts listed above each position.
For each Blend Marker a
player has on a Blend, that
player receives Performance
Points equal to the number
above the Blend Slate.
Blend Markers are not
removed after scoring and
remain until the Blend is
removed from the List.

In the example at left, T.C. (playing yellow)
has a Blend Marker on the two best blends
on the List. T.C. receives 3 points for the Top
Cup! Blend and 2 points for the Swell Blend
and his Scoring Token is moved up on the
Performance Track. The Brewmaster removes
T.C.’s Field Researcher pawn from the World
Map and returns it to T.C.

3. Popular Opinion (continued)

Degrading Blends
Once all players have been awarded points, the Bestselling Blends
become less desirable in the public’s eye and degrade. Remove one
bean from each Blend and return each bean to The Fields. The bean
removed must be the least important part of the Blend.
For example, if a blend is then it is a Bold Blend
with one extra bean ( ). The extra bean would be removed, because
removing any other bean would degrade the blend to a
Regular Blend - a weaker Blend than the Bold Blend. Once a bean
has been removed from all Blends, the Blends are re-ordered on the
List as needed, according to Blend and Bean Rank. If a Blend is ever
ranked lower than Decaf, it is removed from the Best-Seller List.

Removing a Blend

There are only five positions on the Best-Seller List. If for any reason,
a Blend does not rank high enough to place onto the list, it is removed
from the Best-Seller List.
If any Blend is removed from the Best-Seller List, return all remaining
beans on the Slate to the Fields, return any Blend Markers to players
and remove the Slate from the game.
There can be only one Rainbow on the Best-Seller List at a time.
When a new Rainbow is created, the previous Rainbow Blend is
removed from the Best-Seller List.

Example of Degrading

In the example below, the black/white Decaf
Blend loses a white bean, the red/yellow
Half-Caf loses one yellow bean (becoming a
Decaf), and the Americano loses a yellow bean
(becoming a Regular Blend).

The Degrading has changed the Roast Rank of
the Blends, so they are reordered. There are two
Decafs on the List now, but because black beans
are Ranked higher than red, the black Decaf
moves up. In the case of the red Decaf, the extra
yellow bean would only be used to resolve ties.

CHECK FOR GAME END
The game can end in one of three ways which are detailed on the next page. Before setting up for the next round,
The Brewmaster should double-check to make sure none of the game end conditions have been met.

Setting Up for Next Round
Finally, the Brewmaster shifts any remaining Blend Slates above the World map from West to East, filling in any
gaps, then draws new Blend Slates as needed from the deck to fill all empty regions.
Return any beans on Country Crop spaces to The Fields, then restock countries from West to East with a bean as
indicated on the Blend Slates. If not enough beans are left then leave those remaining Country Crop spaces empty.
If all teams choose Research in a round, removed the Blend Slate above Asia from the game, then continue setting
up as described above.

TOO MUCH RESEARCH
If all teams choose Research in a round,
removed the Blend Slate above Asia from
the game, then continue setting up as
described above.

GAME END AND SCORING

VivaJava: The Coffee Game can end in three ways:

NOT ENOUGH BLEND SLATES

If there are not enough Blend Slates
to fill all three spaces above the World
Map at the end of Popular Opinion,
the game ends immediately.

4 END-TRACK ABILITIES

If at any time during a round a player
has reached the end of 4 Ability Tracks,
the game ends at the end of the round.

21 PERFORMANCE POINTS

If a player reaches 21 Performance Points
on the Performance Track after all players
have scored during Popular Opinion, the
game ends at the end of the round.

When one of the three game end conditions is met, players (in turn
order) add up all PPs gained from Researching Levels and any
bonuses from End-Track Abilities.
Research Bonus
Performance Points gained from reaching new levels of Research
are only added to a player’s score at the end of the game and are
cumulative. They are noted by a PP symbol in the upper left.
Count up all PP symbols that have been reached or exceeded. The
Brewmaster then moves the player’s Token forward that many spaces
on the Performance Track.

SCORE REMINDER
Don’t forget - all players receive
Performance Points at the end
of the game for achieving
levels on the Ability Tracks in
their Research Labs!


Shawn has reached the end of the
Invest track, and level 2 of the
Brew track. Research track bonuses
are cumulative, so Shawn will
receive 5 PP for the Invest track,
and 2 PP for the Brew track, for a
total of 8 PP.

The player whose Scoring Token is furthest along the Performance Track is the winner and receives a wonderful
promotion, complete with excellent investment options and a large pension. In the case of a tie, the Scoring Token
that is lower in the stack is victorious!

Decaffeinated VivaJava

Although most players who play VivaJava for the first time feel
comfortable with game play within a couple of rounds, there’s a lot
to absorb. Don’t be intimidated - once you pull your first beans and
create your first killer Blend, you’ll feel like a Brewmaster.
However, some players may prefer to play VivaJava with this learning
variant that streamlines the Research Lab with more standardized
End-Track scoring to allow players to focus on Blending and the
ebb and flow of Degrading. This is a useful variant in introducing the
game to inexperienced players. To play, flip the Research Labs to the
Decaffeinated side and put the Flavor Cards in the box, as they will
not be used. Note that there are no End-Track abilities, and many
Game End scores are increased. Happy Blending!

The Intern Inspansion (VivaJava for 3-4 players)

The Intern Inspansion allows VivaJava to be played with 3 & 4 players. Interns are viable teammates that can
be mentored by players to aid them in Blending or Researching. However, because Interns are often young and
sometimes inept, mentoring an Intern incurs negative consequences, both immediate and long-term. When
chosen, Interns are used for one turn only and then are placed face-down in a pile near the player’s Research Lab.
SET-UP

Before set-up, 3 Blend Slates are randomly removed from the game. The game is then set up as per instructions for
6 or fewer players (as detailed on page 5), with some additions:
1) Reserve one extra unused Roaster; this will be the Intern Bean Reserve. From The Fields, remove 3 Black, 4
Green, 5 Red, 6 Brown, 7 Yellow, and 8 White beans and place them in this Roaster.
2) Shuffle the Intern Deck and place 3 cards, face up, near the
World Map.
3) Each Intern Card shows beans that Interns will have in their
Roasters. These beans are placed onto the Intern Card when drawn.
Bean spaces on an Intern Card that include a bean of a solid color
are filled with beans from The Fields before assigning beans to
Countries. If there is a (?) symbol, the beans are drawn at random
from the Intern Bean Reserve. Beans from The Fields are always
used on Intern Cards before filling Countries if there is a shortage.

1. IN THE FIELD

In turn order, players choose one of two options:

1) Place a Field Researcher onto
a Country as normal.

If a player takes an Intern Card, the red negative action listed on the card must be performed immediately. The
player then moves the Intern and all beans on the Intern Card nearby to his Research Lab. By taking an Intern
Card, a player has chosen to mentor this Intern and utilizes them as a special teammate this round. Once a player
has chosen one of these two actions, the next player in turn order takes one of the two actions and so on.
When all players have chosen an action, the starting player may take another action. If the player has not chosen a
Country, he must do so now. But, if the player has already chosen a Country, he may pass and choose not to mentor
an Intern this round. Once all players have chosen an action or passed, play proceeds to Phase 2.

2. BLEND/RESEARCH

Interns are easily moldable to a player’s will, but are also inexperienced, self-limiting, and sub-par teammates. When
choosing Blend or Research, Interns act as an extra vote for the player mentoring that Intern this turn; Interns always
vote what their mentor votes. If two players on the same team control an Intern, any ties result in Research.

a. Blend (Interns can follow orders - sometimes)

When Blending, Interns act as a normal teammate would, and all rules still apply to them. However, Interns’
mentors are in control of what they do. To simulate this, the player to the left of the mentor takes an extra empty
Roaster from the supply and acts as a stand-in bean-puller. The Intern’s Roaster is filled with the beans located on
the Intern Card. At the mentor’s command, the stand-in player will randomly pull beans from the bag and place
them onto the team’s Blend Slate.

Interns can also use their mentor’s Research Abilities to
enhance their bean-pulling power, but they must share
them. For example, if a mentoring player has reached the
first level of SELECT, the Intern under his control may
use this Ability. However, once the Intern has used this
Ability, the mentor is no longer be able to use this Ability
again when pulling from his own Roaster this round.
Once Blending or Researching is completed, players take
any Interns and flip them face-down into a pile beside
their Research Shacks. Any unused beans in the Intern
Roaster are returned to The Fields.

b. Research (Interns can learn - mostly)

When Researching with an Intern, they learn from mistakes
of past Interns, drawing from a pool of mentored knowledge.
For every intern already in a player’s pile (not including the
face-up Intern), that player receives one (1) Research Point
in addition to the 3 RPs as per the standard rules.

Example: If a player chooses
an Intern and has collected 3
other face-down interns, that
player receives 3 extra RPs
to allocate that round.

3. POPULAR OPINION

Place any unused Interns into a discard pile and return all beans on those cards to The Fields. If the Intern Deck is
exhausted, shuffle the discarded cards and form another draw pile. Three new Intern cards are then drawn from the
Intern Deck and placed face-up near the World Map and their Bean Spaces are filled with beans from The Fields.

GAME END AND SCORING

At the end of the game, after all other scoring has taken place, each player counts the number of face-down Intern
cards in their possession.
In reverse turn order, each player’s Score Marker
is moved backwards on the Performance Track
one space per Intern in his possession.
The player with the highest position on the
Performance Track is the victor.

Variants

Variable Starter Beans
Instead of players taking 2 white beans and 1 yellow bean from The Fields to
put in their Roasters, at the start of the game each player is dealt
3 Intern Cards. Players then take the three Starter Beans indicated from The
Fields and place them in their Roasters. All Intern Cards are then returned
and, in games of 3 to 4 players, shuffled to form the Intern Deck.
Roaster Purge Coins (Learning Variant)
At the start of the game, players are given a Roaster Purge Coin in their
player color. At the end of any Popular Opinion phase, after Scoring, a
player may discard his Roaster Purge Coin and remove up to 3 beans of his
choice from his Personal Roaster, placing the beans back into The Fields.
This variant helps beginning players may find an undesirable bean mix in
their Roasters after a few rounds of play and the cleaning of a “dirty” Roaster
can help them remain a viable teammate when Blending.
Featured Blend Cards
At the start of the game, shuffle the 8 Featured Blend Cards and place them
next to the Performance Track. Take the top card and place it face up next
to the deck. During the Popular Opinion phase, all players on a team that
created the Blend type shown on the Featured Blend Card gain the bonus
shown. Then, remove the card from the game, and the next card in the deck
is placed face up next to the draw deck. Colors on the cards are for sample only;
blends may contain beans of any color in legal combinations.
Flavor Card Draft
At the start of the game, each player is given 2 Flavor Cards from the
Flavor Card deck. Players may choose 1 and discard the other. After
all players have chosen, all discarded Flavor Cards are shuffled to form
the Flavor Card Deck. Any cards that say “Play Immediately” may b e
held and played at the start of Popular Opinion during Round 1.
Variable Country Tokens
At the end of Popular Opinion each round, after Field Researchers
have been returned to all players, the Brewmaster collects all Country
Tokens, shuffles them facedown, and then redistributes them to Countries as in initial set-up.

BE CIVIL

Although the rules for VivaJava cover
most situations that may occur during
a game, occasionally an instance may
come up that is not explicitly stated.
In these cases, it is often better to hold
a vote amongst the players in order to
keep the game moving.

TIE-BREAKERS

In the rare situation that a simultaneous action would
directly affect another player’s ability to take action,
resolve the action in Turn Order. Otherwise, Blend/
Research actions are always simultaneous. Cover your
Research Lab if you’re really anxious about it.
Appendix A: Country/Intern Tokens

